I went to JPL to interview for a job. And as the
supervisor of the astronomy group, I did the
interviewing. So that was in, I guess, sometime in
1961. And
what did you think of when you first met him? He does
not act like the public's typical image of what an
astronomer should act like. No. but he had a lot of
enthusiasm and a lot of bounce to him. He was
obviously knowledgeable, and he was interested
in working in a field where not too many people were
interested in working, and that seemed more than
adequate to me to offer the man a job. Later, of
course, we became very close personal friends,
and it's a little hard since I've been in touch with
him all of the time for the past 30 years to really
remember back to what I thought of him 30 years ago.
I can't help, I can't separate that from the
contemporary Spinrad, but... He got pretty
unhappy here at JPL. He got unhappy here because he
couldn't get telescope time. And he, when he came
here, assumed that he would be treated like any
other young astronomer. And he found out to the
contrary. He found out that people were simply not
giving time on large telescopes to do planetary
projects. They were looked down upon. And he tried
to mine the old plate vaults at Mount Wilson. They
were willing to have him do that. But as far as
getting new time... McDonald or Mount Wilson, no
luck. So he started looking around, and when he got
a job offer from his old alma mater, he left and went
to Berkeley. Okay, let's discuss the world's
greatest planetary astrophysicist, Gerard
Peter Kuiper. Why don't you first cross paths with
him? Well, Kuiper was around the lab all of the time
in the early days of the space program. And Kuiper,
of course, tended to look upon anyone at JPL as
being a good guy. Because to him, the people at JPL
were building the kinds of spacecraft that he was
interested in. They were promoting the kind of
work that he wanted to do. And they were potential
sources of funds. And so anybody who worked at JPL
was his friend. saw anyone he recognized from JPL
at a meeting and he tended to back you into the
corner and began to harangue you with his latest
theories and ideas and he was a great guy. On the
other hand, if you were on an opposing team, he
could be a pretty wicked player. I don't remember
when I first met him. I know he came to the lab
regularly. We had meetings with him throughout
the period from, say, 59 on. But I couldn't give you
an exact date. How about Girard de Vaucouleur?
Well, I worked with de Vaucouleur on committees
that were set up by NASA to look into the need for
planetary telescopes.
I attended these meetings, usually with Al Hibbs,
sometimes not. But people involved included Al
Wilson, , Stan Greenfield, who I guess was with
RAND Corporation at the time. We sometimes met
with people like, I don't know, what was his name,
Edson, I guess it was, who was at the Pentagon at the
time as a civilian scientist at the Pentagon.
Anyway, I met de Vaucouleur working on these
various teams together where we were trying to get
support for a NASA building, one or more large
planetary telescopes. And he was, of course, very
enthused about his Mars work at the time, met with
him often, and enjoyed his company very much.
Tell me billions and billions of things about Carl
Sagan. Well, Carl, of course, was a graduate
student of Kuiper's when Kuiper first went to
Arizona. In fact, I guess he was a graduate student
before Kuiper went to Arizona and followed him
there from Chicago. I guess Carl's PhD is actually
still a Chicago PhD since he began it there. But I
called Kuiper one day and said, Gee, we've been
interested in ideas about solar system cosmology
and the origin of the solar system and a lot of
disagreement on this, but you've done a lot of work
in the field. Could you sort of write us a position
paper that tells us what at least your current
ideas are on where things stand with our knowledge
of how the solar system originally, how it
originated? And he said, gee, I wish I could, but
I'm awfully busy. However, I've got this very,
very bright young graduate student named Carl
Sagan, and I'm sure he'd do a bang-up job for you.
And he really needs the money. He's very poor, and
he'd do a great job, and it'd work out well all
around. And so I said, well, fine, sure, we'll let
Carl work on this. And so we met Carl. He was, of
course, working on his thesis on the greenhouse
model of the Venus atmosphere. And after he had
pretty well along, why, he came up to the lab and
gave us a seminar on the greenhouse model of the
Venus atmosphere. And we all met him and
known him ever since. Was he self-assured even
then? He was pretty self-confident even in those
days, yes, very much so for a graduate student.
Yeah, he was always a very confident person, but
not overbearing or anything. He was just quite
sure of what he did.
Where did you first meet Harlan Smith, and what did
you think of him when you saw him? Harlan Smith, to
me at the time, seemed one of the senior
astronomers of the world. I don't remember where I
first met Harlan. I remember many incidents where
I was with him, like just the two of us had dinner
together at Snowmass, Colorado, when we were both
there for a meeting of the National Academy Solar
System Exploration Committee. And I talked to him
many times at meetings
American Astronomical Society or of the
Planetary Sciences Division. He, of course,
hosted a couple of meetings of the Planetary
Sciences Division at Austin. I ran into him in many
places, but I really don't remember where I first
met Harlan or when. But it was always a great
pleasure to talk to him. I always felt that
although he was a very senior man in the field, that
he always treated everyone as if they were equal
and seemed to respect other people's opinions. He
was always an exciting person to talk to and that he
was always full of both ideas about astronomy and
knowledge of the current political situation and
trying to get new telescopes or new probes or
whatever underway. And I was always very happy
when I could could sit down and talk to him. The last
time I saw him was at the AAS meeting in Pasadena
about five years ago. And there he grabbed me and
said he had this very bright young woman who was
about to get her PhD at Texas and wondered if there
might be any place for her at JPL. It was Jackie
Green. And I met Jackie, talked to her, and was very
much impressed by her. It turns out she went to
Hawaii for a couple of years, but she is, in fact,
now at JPL. But he was looking after his graduate
students, as he always did, and making a good case
for them. Actually, I don't think she was his
student. I think she was Roman Smolakowski's
student. But she was there in the department, and
he was looking out for them. Tell me something
about Roger Moore.
Didn't have a close relationship with Roger. Knew
Roger when he was at headquarters. Served on a
committee or two with him. Was never close to
Roger. Never had any private dinners with him or
anything like that. Couldn't really tell you much
about Roger. Maybe you can tell me something about
Nancy Roman. Oh, I could tell you some things about
Nancy. Nancy and I served together on the
Astronomy Subcommittee of NASA from 1960 to 62.
Nancy, of course, chaired that committee. So in a
sense, I worked for her. I was JPL's delegate for
the first two years to that august group. Bill
Brunk, for a part of that time, was the
representative from Lewis Research Center,
where he worked at the time, then left when he went
back to finish his PhD. We had a lot of outstanding
consultants on it. And that's another story in and
of itself. But I worked with Nancy fairly closely
for two years. And to be blunt about it, I was not
always happy with Nancy. I think the thing that
really frosted me was her very, very
down-the-nose attitude toward solar system
astronomy generally. She felt that it was very
distinctly inferior to stellar and galactic
work. And I remember when we had a meeting of the
committee at the lab one time, she sort of took me
aside and said, rather confidentially, that
she'd been talking to Ira Bowen and that he had
agreed that there were still some things that
could be done from the ground in planetary
astronomy. And she gave me this information as if
it were a great discovery and something that, boy,
wasn't this interesting, that the great man, the
director of Mount Wilson and Palomar
Observatory, actually said there were still some
things that could be done from the ground in solar
system astronomy. And she was very surprised by
this. Well, I was promoting within the astronomy
committee the need for NASA to build their own
planetary telescope because of the difficulty of
getting time. And I remember a meeting we had at
Ames. I guess it was the last meeting that I
represented the lab. I'd served my two years.
People present included, for example, Jesse
Greenstein as a consultant, We had on that
committee people like Freeman Dyson, for
example, was a consultant to the committee. There
were a lot of big names there. Anyway, I made my
pitch. It probably took 10 minutes saying why I
felt it was important that NASA build their own
planetary telescope. She turned to Gary Mulders,
who was representing the National Science
Foundation. Well, what do you think about this?
And Mulders said that, well, he agreed totally
with what I had said, that... The NSF could not
support building additional telescopes. They
were hard-pressed to keep up with their
requirements as they were, and that he thought
NASA indeed should go ahead and build their own
planetary telescope, that they should support
planetary astronomy. So she asked Jesse
Greenstein, and Greenstein said, well, yeah, I
quite agree. There are a number of things, useful
things that can be done from the ground yet. NASA
ought to do them. They're not going to get enough
time to do them on existing telescopes. and yeah
they should do it well i went away feeling really
good i mean the whole committee had backed me up
nasa ought to build a telescope well that was my
last meeting but somebody else then later showed
me the minutes of that meeting and nowhere in those
minutes of that meeting do you ever find any part of
this discussion that strongly supports nasa
building a planetary telescope and that really
frosted me that had just been written out of the
minutes Tell me something about Bill Brunk, who
actually ran the ground-based planetary
astronomy for longer than everybody else put
together, I guess. Yeah, I think that's true. Bill
and I, of course, met each other when we were
representatives from JPL and from Lewis on this
initial Nancy Roman Planetary Astronomy, or not
Planetary Astronomy, but this was the Astronomy
Subcommittee, which included, at that time,
solar system astronomy, solar astronomy,
stellar and galactic astronomy. It covered all of
astronomy.
So that... We got to be friends and work together on
that
committee. And then he left to go back and finish
his PhD, and then came back to headquarters as an
employee. And Bill and I worked together closely
over the years. He was my program manager when I was
leader of the International Halley Watch. And
we always got along well together. He supported me
pretty well. I have no real complaints about that.
I often felt, however, that as people seem to do
when they spend a long period of time in
Washington, D.C., I think they tend to lose touch
with the realities in the field, as it were, and in
the field of astronomy, and they tend to become
more concerned about how do I fit what I want to do
within my budget and how do I satisfy the boss, then
am I suggesting what's best for astronomy? And so I
often disagreed with him on whether he was really
doing what was best for the field. I felt he was out
of touch at times, but he tended to annoy me a little
sometimes. But we always got along well. Do you
think planetary astronomers mind out? No. I think
there are, as long as the planets have
atmospheres, those atmospheres are going to
change. We don't even understand our own, let
alone the atmospheres of the other planets. I
think continuing study of the major planets is
certainly in order. Until we have some kind of
permanent presence in orbit around Mars or
something, there's some... work perhaps yet to be
done on Mars but I think particularly in the small
bodies of the solar system there are so many of them
that even if we eventually get missions to a few of
them one or a comet or two a few asteroids there are
so many of them out there that the only way that it's
ever all going to be tied together is from a
ground-based study of these objects and uh I think
even solar system planetary astronomy has got a
lot of future ahead of it because of the
impossibility of doing it all from space. What's
the position of planetary astronomy at JPL right
now? I think there is a little sense of dread, a
sense of Maybe we've seen the best days of it. I
think there's a morale problem at JPL today, to be
perfectly frank. The lab has generally been an
ebullient place to work, a place where everybody
sort of felt that the sky was the limit, upward and
onward. We're doing great things. And next year,
we're going to do even greater ones. I think that
was true for many years. And I think there has now
come a realization that, This isn't going to
continue to happen quite that way. We're being
forced, probably correctly, to do business in
different ways in the sense that the
multi-billion dollar missions are just not going
to be flown. We've got to fly smaller missions.
There is a change of direction. This always means
some heartbreak for people who've been involved
in the old way of doing business for a time. And I
think among the planetary people in general, the
lack of support, we've seen the loss of a number of
very good people simply because they can no longer
get their ground-based work funded. And I think
there's a certain loss of morale and a fear of the
future, perhaps, rather than an eagerness for the
future. It's not a palpable thing exactly, but
everybody's concerned. Let's put it that way.
Well, that also answers what was going to be my next
question, what do you think of the future? But
again, this has got to be a guess, but you'll recall
in the past there were always been rumors they were
going to close JPL and make it the foothill campus
of Pasadena City College or something like that.
And of course, NASA does have big budgets. In the
long-term future, do you see JPL around in 20
years, and do you see any planetary astronomy
being done at JPL if it's still here? I think JPL
will still be here in 20 years, yeah. I think it'll
be a rather different place than it is today. I
think it won't have the outriggers that it does
today, that is the least space around town. I think
it'll probably all be here on one campus, so to
speak, except for the computing facility at
Woodbury. I think that the missions that we fly
will be smaller, perhaps a bit more often than the
big missions, but much smaller missions. I think
that there will perhaps be a tauter, tighter
management in the sense that I think that you'll
find more a skunkworks approach to things. You
won't throw people at a project, so to speak, that
people will be just doing things a little
differently than they've traditionally been
done at the lab. And I think the same thing is true
of... ground-based astronomy. I think there will
always remain people here in the field, but I think
that the number may be somewhat smaller, and I
think that most people, instead of being able to
spend 100 percent time on research, there's
almost nobody doing that now even, although there
were years ago. I think you'll find everybody will
have maybe half time working on one of these
projects, half time on their research, I think JPL
will continue to exist, will continue to be a very
reputable and enjoyable even place to work, but I
think that the feeling of youthful enthusiasm,
well, at least among some of us older ones, it isn't
there anymore. We're not so young anymore is
perhaps the answer to that. I shouldn't really
answer for what some of the new young people coming
in may think about it. Since planetary astronomy
got back into high gear about 30 years or so ago,
what do you think the taxpayers have gotten out of
it?
Well, I think there have been a number of useful
things that have come out of the program, and you
can go at this at many, many different levels. I
think they've gotten a sense of almost a
competition with the Soviets, and I think that the
American public generally enjoys a good contest.
I think they've got the feeling that we won some of
it. I think they've been excited and had their
minds opened a little bit by some of the
discoveries. I think that's good. Clearly, the
advances in miniaturization and computing and so
on that were necessary for a lot of our space
activities have been carried on into the regular
commercial life. One might argue that perhaps the
Japanese have made better use of these
discoveries than we have in the commercial
sector, but certainly people have very cheap,
extremely potent desk computers today. I don't
know how much of this would have happened without
the space program. Maybe it would have happened
anyway, but certainly I would feel it wouldn't
have happened as soon. And I think this is true in
the medical field. I think there have been a lot of
great advances, miniaturization and so on,
application of laser technology and so on, some of
which was developed within the space program
that's being applied here on Earth. You can
really, I think just trying to open young people's
eyes to the universe to the impressiveness the
fascination of it to give them the impression that
there's something more important out there than
than accounting or or belonging to a gang is
important it gives the people the young people a
sense of place in the universe and that maybe
there's something that they can go out and do that
will add to the good of the world as opposed to just
simply being consumers. I don't know. What do you
think modern planetary astronomy has done for
astronomy as a whole?
Hmm. I hadn't thought about that one. You think
it's shaken them up a little bit? Oh, it probably
has. I'm sure there's been some instrumentation
that's been developed by planetary people for use
on space probes that's been applied to
telescopes. I think a lot of the development,
though, has been military and then has dribbled
down into both planetary and classical galactic
and stellar astronomy rather than any direct
exchange just between the branches of astronomy.
Well, in addition to that, I'm thinking of
theories of star formation, which now, I guess,
have to include planets. Well, that's certainly
true. I mean, the discovery of the dust and what
have you around... several stars on Fomalhaut, I
guess. Beta Pictoris was the first one, yeah. And I
guess there's some hints of material around Vega.
That certainly has, they've interacted, let's
put it that way. Well,
as I said, Solar system astronomers, planetary
astronomers, and stellar astronomers do talk to
each other today and I think have some
appreciation of the work that each other is doing,
and I think that both fields are more fruitful for
it. This is getting awfully general now, but what
do you think planetary astronomy has done for
science as a whole? It's obviously affecting
something like biology, and I don't know about
geology and meteorology. I don't know about
chemistry so much. Well, what do you think? Well,
sure. Again, one of the things that the space
program in general has done is made us aware of the
fragileness of our own environment and clearly if
you're going to understand the Earth's
atmosphere those same theories ought to apply to
other planets and so we've got a number of test
subjects now where we can try to apply general
meteorological theories which I'm sure that
studies of atmosphere of Venus and the major
planets have had impact on our studies of our own
atmosphere and Clearly, the studies toward the
planet Earth, as NASA now puts it, are of great and
even grave interest to the future of the human
race. Considerations of the greenhouse effect of
the ozone holes have a lot to say about whether
we'll even survive. Of course, ultimately, there
is the job of mapping out the small near-Earth
asteroids to the extent that if one really does
threaten the Earth, maybe we can do something
about it in the future. It isn't to say we ought to
mount any program now to do it, but what we ought to
be doing is trying to find all of these bodies so we
know if any of them are going to become a threat and
they have an impact on everything, every person's
life in that sense. But as far as direct impacts on
science,
All science is a unity, really, and I've just not
thought about the direct interchanges, say,
between astronomy and chemistry. It's had
enormous impacts on physics, clearly. I mean, the
interactions between astronomy and physics,
they're one. Astronomy is just physics applied to
the study of extraterrestrial subjects. You
often hear the statements made, such as the space
program has given us a view of the Earth as seen from
outside as a planet, and studies, ground-based
and probes of other planets have shown, yeah, it is
just another planet, but unique and so on. But do
you think the public has really changed its
attitude towards, or the way it thinks about
Earth, or just changed its attitude, period?
Well... I think there has been a change. I think the
average man in the street doesn't stop to think
each day that he should be concerned about whether
the earth is heating up or whether the ozone hole is
going to cause him to have skin cancer or not. But
certainly among those who read the daily
newspapers or weekly news magazines or even those
who listen to the TV news cannot help but be much
more aware of their world and of the fragile nature
of that world as a result of the space program, and
in particular of various kinds of solar system
studies. They have to be more aware of it and more
concerned about it. I mean, in the past, man is
largely worried about warfare, man against man,
but now I think he is finally becoming very aware,
or should be, that that he may be doing himself in
with some of his activities, both as to use of
resources and his disposal of materials. When you
meet people, strangers, say, on an airplane,
they're sitting next to you, what's their
reaction when they find out what you do for a
living? Most of them, oh, gee, that's
interesting. And then they usually think a
minute, and gee, Have you heard about and
something that they've read somewhere or heard
somewhere and were kind of curious about, and can
you tell me anything about thus and so? That's
often happened. They're usually fascinated. So
at least in your experience, it's a positive
image. I would say so, yeah. Originally, and for
the first few decades, JPL was just strictly...
let's face it, working for the Army as a contractor
developing weapons. When you first came here, was
that still a situation? Yes. Okay. When did JPL get
handed over to
the SA? Well, we did, of course, work with the Army
in putting up the initial explorers, and then when
We were talking with the Army and with the defense
people about doing additional space-type
missions that were more research than anything
else before NASA came into existence. But NASA
then, of course, was founded and immediately They
were told that they could take over existing
laboratories if the laboratories were willing to
be taken over to work with them on the space program
that had been proposed. And so they said, well,
since we had worked on the Explorers, we're the
obvious place to turn to. They'd like to have JPL.
And people at JPL were very enthused about this.
Most of the people here felt they'd much rather
work on studies of the solar system than they would
work on... on military field artillery,
long-range field rockets, and that kind of thing,
especially since that knowledge was applicable
to the new space program as well. So that by the end
of 58, everybody here was very enthused about
being a part of NASA. I think it was in 58 that NASA
took us over then with great enthusiasm on
everybody's part here. Not that we disliked the
Army people we worked for. I mean, in some ways,
working for the Army was a rather pleasant
experience in that we had a real skunk-works
approach to things in those days. The Army would
sort of come in with a bucket of money and suggest
that we do some work in an area. The people here
would kind of decide how the money should be spent.
If there was a lot of money in the bucket at the end of
the year, no one was concerned about it, that there
might be any less the next year because we hadn't
spent it all. I mean, they spent what they had to
spend to get the job done. And if the bucket ran dry
for some reason, why, they'd simply go back to the
Army and say, hey, you know, can you fill up the
bucket partway again? And usually the bucket
would get filled up. And nobody was concerned in
those days about which charge number to charge
this hour's work to, or it was just There were broad
tasks being assigned to JPL, and the people here
decided how best to carry them out, and the money
always seemed available. So in that sense, the
working relationship was great. It was ideal.
But, of course, the work being done was work on
missiles like the Sergeant, for example. So the
whole idea of converting our expertise over to JPL
Learning more about the solar system was just, I
don't know, I think everybody reacted with great
enthusiasm, with a few exceptions.